UNIX Operating System
The operating system is a software that manages the computer hardware and software resources

What does an operating system do?
The operating system interfaces between the application program and the hardware.
The OS allows multiple users to run programs.
The OS supports multitasking:
- Multiple processes can run simultaneously
- A process is an executing instance of a program
- A process consists of multiple execution units called threads.

The operating systems consists of the kernel and other software including system utilities, applications, shells, libraries of common functions, etc.
The shell is a special application that provides an interface for running other applications.
The interface to the kernel is a layer of software called the system calls.
Libraries of common functions are built on top of the system call interface.

Users
When we log in to a UNIX system, the system looks up our login name in its password file, usually the file /etc/passwd.
An entry in the password file, contains seven colon-separated fields:
e.g.
sar:x:205:105:Stephen Rago:/home/sar:/bin/ksh
1. login name
2. encrypted password
3. numeric user ID (205)
4. numeric group ID (105)
5. comment field
6. home directory (/home/sar)
7. shell program (/bin/ksh)

User ID
The user ID is a numerica value that identifies a user to the system. It is assigned by the system administrator when the login name is assigned, we cannot change it.
User ID 0 is the called the root/superuser. This entry in the password file normally has the login name of root, and the special privileges of this user are called superuser privileges.

Group ID
A password file contains multiple entries that specify the same group ID.
Groups collect users together into projects or departments. This allows the sharing or resources, such as filesm among members of the same group. There is also a group file that maps group names into numeric group IDs. The group files is usually /etc/group.

File System
The UNIX file system is a hierarchical arrangement of directories and files. Everything starts in the directory called root, whose name is the single character /.
A directory is a file that contains directory entries. Each directory entry contains a filename along with a structure of information describing the attributes of the file.
The attributes of a file are:
- Type of file (regular file, directory)
- Size of the file
- Owner of the file
- Permissions for the file

Filename
The names in a directory are called filenames.
Two filenames are automatically created whenever a new directory is created:
. (called dot)
.. (called dot-dot)
Dot refers to the current directory, and dot-dot refers to the parent directory. 
Note: In the root directory, dot-dot is the same as dot.

pathname
A sequence of one or more filenames, separated by slashes and optionally starting with a slash, forms a pathname.
A pathname that begins with a slash is called an absolute pathname; otherwise, it’s called a relative pathname.
Relative pathnames refer to files relative to the current directory.
The name for the root of the file system (/) is a special-case absolute pathname that has no filename component.

File Descriptor
File descriptors are small non-negative integers that the kernel uses to identify the files accessed by a process.
Whenever it opens an existing file or creates a new file, the kernel returns a file descriptor that we use when we want to read or write the file.

Input and output: stdin, stdout, and stderr
All shells open three descriptors whenever a new program is run: standard input, standard output, and standard error.
Most shells provide a way to redirect any or all of these three descriptors to any file.
e.g., the following command executes ls with its standard output redirected to the file named file.list.
ls > file.list
Unbuffered I/O is provided by the functions open, read, write, lseek, and close. These functions all work with file descriptors

Signals
Used to for processes to talk to each other. Notify a process that an event occured.
We have to be the owner of the other process or the superuser to send it a signal.

System Calls
All operating systems provice service points through which progras request services from the kernel.

Privilege Modes (lower)
User Mode
- Access to memeory is limited
- Cannot execute some instructions
- Cannot disable interrupts
- Cannot change arbitrary processor state
- Cannot access memory management units
Transition from user mode to system mode can only happen via well defined entry points, e.g. (system calls)

Privilege Modes (higher)
System mode
- Can execute any instruction
- Can access any memory locations, e.g., accessing hardware devices
- Can enable and disable interrupts
- Can change privileged processor state
- Can access memory management units
- Can modify registers for various descriptor tables

